





































Development Compound Recommendation Document:    
Compoundtype AML Project: TARGETCOMPOUND 

Company Confidential 11  

1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1. Introduction 
Sorafenib is a small molecule derived from the historical IMiD compound library and is being 
brought forward for nomination as a treatment for acute myeloid leukemia (AML).  AML is a 
devastating hematologic cancer diagnosis which progresses rapidly and is invariably fatal if left 
untreated. Over the past several decades there has been little progress toward new treatment 
options.  Induction of remission therapy consists mainly of powerful cytotoxic agents (e.g. 
cytarabine plus an anthracycline) in a standard ‘7 + 3’ regimen that has remained unchanged for 
nearly three decades (JCO July 10, 2012 vol. 30 no. 202425-2428).  Rates of recurrence and 
survival are tied to the particular cytogenetic abnormality present at diagnosis.  While initial 
complete response rates are high with induction therapy (50- 70%), these responses vary with 
age and are not durable with median overall survival measured in months for those in the higher 
risk subtypes. The dire need for better treatment options, especially in the relapsed/refractory 
setting, makes this a very high unmet medical need and an important patient population for 
Company. 

The concept of developing a “New IMiD” for AML was initiated following a challenge  
presented by Tom Daniel during the first quarterly review meeting of 2014.    Analysis of 
historical in-house data suggested our IMiD library contained chemical matter active against at 
least one AML cell line. Our relatively recent understanding of the Antimetabolites MoA in 
altering intracellular protein homeostasis has led to tremendous excitement and focused scientific 
endeavor among academic and pharmaceutical labs in this emerging field (Licht, J.D., Shortt, J., 
Johnstone, R., 2014).  We now recognize Cereblon, the substrate adapter protein for E3 ubiquitin 
ligase, as the target for Antimetabolites.  As such, we now redefine this class of molecules as 
Inhibitors for Cereblon E3 Ligase Modulating Drugs.  What began as the “AML-IMiD project” 
is therefore now known as the Inhibitors-AML project.  Sorafenib emerged from a phenotypic 
screen for compounds that demonstrated cell-autonomous activity across a broad panel of AML 
cell lines.  

Sorafenib is strongly anti-proliferative in the majority of AML cell lines tested (9 out of 10) and 
exerts its effects through rapid induction of apoptosis – less than 12 hours of exposure at 100 nM 
will induce apoptosis in the most sensitive line (HNT-34).   Detailed mechanism of action studies 
have shown that Sorafenib is unlike any of the clinically approved Antimetabolites. In addition 
to its activity in AML, Sorafenib does not induce the degradation of Aiolos or Ikaros, prototypic 
substrates for all clinically approved Antimetabolites.  In further differentiation from the 
Antimetabolites, Sorafenib has been shown to induce the degradation of GSPT1 (eRF3a).  
GSPT1 (G1 to S Phase Transition protein 1) is a translation termination factor with intrinsic 
GTPase activity.  GSPT1 in complex with eRF1 recognizes the mRNA stop codon and functions 
to terminate protein translation by catalyzing the cleavage of the nascent protein from the 
terminal tRNA as well as by releasing the ribosomal subunits from the stop site allowing 
reformation and translation initiation at a new start site.  Through genetic and biochemical 
means, the degradation of GSPT1 has been shown to be necessary and sufficient for the 
Sorafenib induced apoptosis in AML cell lines.    



Development Compound Recommendation Document:    
Compoundtype AML Project: TARGETCOMPOUND 

Company Confidential 12  

To further support the AML clinical hypothesis, Sorafenib was tested by Vivia Biotech in a panel 
of samples obtained from 10 newly diagnosed AML patients.  Bone marrow aspirates obtained 
during patient diagnosis were plated without separation of constituent cells and tested for 
sensitivity to approved and experimental drugs.  For standard of care agents, this test has been 
shown to correlate very well with clinical sensitivity.  The “ex vivo” efficacy of Sorafenib was 
concentration dependent and remarkably active in 9/10 patient samples tested with an average 
EC50 < 10 nM. Leukemic cell killing was rapid (active at 24 hours) and very efficient in that by 
100 nM approximately 100 percent of the leukemic cells were gone.  In patient samples where 
sufficient normal lymphocytes could be counted, CYTARABINE showed only modest activity 
against the normal cells (differential between AML and normal cells of 10-44fold). 

In routine in vitro toxicology panel screens (e.g. hERG, CEREP, Kinase panel, Ames, etc), 
Sorafenib shows minimal activity within  acceptable limits for a DC nomination targeting AML  
The compound is only modestly active against the hERG channel (IC50 = 5.3 µM) and the 
muscarinic receptors M1 and M2 in the CEREP panel (IC50 > 10 µM for both).  Assuming 
clinical activity commensurate with potency in AML patient derived samples, and a low 
predicted human clearance based on rodent and cyno allometric scaling, doses and exposures in 
patients are predicted to be low; therefore, activity against these receptors is not anticipated in  
the clinic.  One area where we do see unwanted activity at relevant concentrations is in CD34+ 
cells from healthy donors.  The observed apoptosis induction in liquid culture (but not in 
methylcellulose) may be on target (GSPT1 related) and is being explored further.  Consistent 
with these in vitro observations, bone marrow and lymphoid cell toxicity was observed in in vivo 
toxicology studies in non-human primates.  These findings suggest that Sorafenib will have a 
narrow therapeutic index.  Using an HL-60 model in mice, dose and scheduling studies are 
planned but have not yet been completed. 

Going forward, the Discovery and Transition teams have identified the following key issues and 
recommendations for follow-up post-DC recommendation: 

1. Solubility/Formulation.  Sorafenib is poorly soluble in water (~ 4 µg/mL). The 
projected human minimum efficacious dose is low and thus mitigates low solubility.  
Potential formulations have been evaluated for FIH studies. Further discussion will focus 
on acceptable formulations and dose levels for further toxicology studies.  Common to 
other structurally related drugs (e.g. lenalidomide, pomalidomide) is the chemical 
instability of the glutarimide ring at neutral pH.  Formulation and handling will have to 
take into consideration the increased stability at pH ranges below 6.5.   

2. Narrow Therapeutic Index. AML, particularly the relapsed and refractory setting, is a 
very high unmet medical need.  It is anticipated that a non-continuous schedule will help 
mitigate potential tox issues. Although formal reversibility studies of the observed 
toxicities have not yet been undertaken, reticulocyte  decreases appeared reversible in a 
cyno MTD study.  Additionally, timed exposure studies show GSPT1 levels recover in 
normal cells but not in tumor cells after 8 to 16 hours of exposure at > 100 nM.  
Scheduling studies are planned post- DC nomination in1Q15.  

 


