Introduction: 
Diffuse Large B Cell lymphoma (DLBCL)  accounts for approximately 40% of all non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and 
exhibits distinct epidemiological, genetic and clinical features 1,2. While the addition of anti-CD20 antibodies to 
standard chemotherapy has improved the 5 year overall survival to 58%, a significant number of patients will 
relapse 3. To date, the outcomes for these relapsed/and or refractory (R/R) and high-risk patients remain 
particularly poor. Gene expression profiling has identified at least two large subgroups within DLBCL based on 
cell of origin (COO): a germinal center B-cell (GCB) subtype and an activated B-cell (ABC) subtype 4,5. Each 
subtype exhibits different pathogenic mechanisms and have different clinical outcomes, with ABC-DLBCL having 
an inferior prognosis to chemotherapy containing regimens in both frontline and salvage settings 4-7. Given the 
increased understanding of DLBCL disease biology, novel targeted agents including immunomodulatory drugs 
are being developed to treat high risk and R/R DLBCL patients 8.   
 Recent studies on the mechanism of the immunomodulatory agents, including lenalidomide and 
pomalidomide, reveal a new paradigm of drug action on protein homeostatic mechanisms. Crystallographic 
studies show that these drugs bind to a tri-tryptophan pocket on the surface of Cereblon, a substrate receptor 
protein of the Cullin 4 RING E3 ubiquitin ligase complex (CRL4CRBN) 9,10.  Binding of IMiD compounds to Cereblon 
results in recruitment of two critical transcription factors for lymphogenesis, Aiolos and Ikaros, to Cereblon leading 
to their ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation. In multiple myeloma cell lines, the degradation of 
Aiolos or Ikaros by either lenalidomide treatment or by shRNA mediated knock-down reduced IRF4 transcription 
and protein levels, resulting in decreased proliferative capacity 11,12. Additionally, the co-stimulatory effects of IMiD 
compounds on T-cell activation was determined to be through degradation of Aiolos and Ikaros, negative 
regulators of interleukin-2 (IL-2) expression 12,13.  The role of Aiolos and Ikaros in DLBCL has not been defined, 
